# 1.1-Introduction

                                                                                           [home](../../)                                                                                   [next ›](1.2-colors.md)

## 1.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will see the very basic concepts of CSS.

### Content

* [Syntax](1.1-introduction.md#syntax)
* [The C stands for Cascading](1.1-introduction.md#the-c-stands-for-cascading)
* [Inheritance](1.1-introduction.md#inheritance)

### Syntax

CSS is a declarative language which makes it fairly easy to understand. It is also nice to you as it does not break on error, so your page is not completely broken when you make a small mistake. On the other hand it makes it harder to spot the issues because you don't see anything wrong.

```css
[selector] {
    [property]: [value];
    [<--declaration--->]
}
[<--------rule-------->]
```

```css
p {
    background-color: #bada55;
}
```

When looking at the CSS above we can specify the different parts of a CSS file.

* `p` is a selector
* `background-color` is a property
* `#bada55` is a value
* `background-color: #bada55;` is a declaration

CSS does not really care about spaces, tabs or newlines. But it is a good practice to add those to make yout code more readable.

#### Comments

Comments in CSS are done like this:

```css
/* Put your comment here */
```

But since CSS is a nice guy and ignores everything that is invalid, it does not complain about other ways of commenting such as `//` or `<!-- -->`.

#### Shorthand notation

For some properties like `margin`, `padding`, `background`, `font` and `border` you can use shorthand notations to set several property values in a single line.

```css
.foo {
  margin: top right bottom left;
  margin: top rightLeft bottom;
  margin: topBottom rightLeft;
  margin: topBottomRightLeft;
}
```

**example**

The following code examples have the same style output

```css
.foo {
    background: hotpink url("image.png") 10px 10px no-repeat fixed;
    padding: 10px 20px 30px 40px;
}
```

```css
.foo {
    background-color: hotpink;
    background-image: url("bg-graphic.png");
    background-position: 10px 10px;
    background-repeat: no-repeat;
    background-attachment: fixed;

    padding-top: 10px;
    padding-right: 20px;
    padding-bottom: 30px;
    padding-left: 40px;
}
```

### The C stands for Cascading

In CSS, styles are applied from top to bottom, allowing styles to be added or overridden. Because browsers already put some default styles on a number of selectors, you use this phenomenon the entire time.

For example: a browser defines that a `strong` tag need to be bold, but you can still overwrite the style with your own by just targetting `strong`

**Example**

```css
p {
  background: #f00;
  background: #0f0;
}

p {
  background: #00f;
}
```

In the example above the background of the `p` will be `#00f`.

### Inheritance

Apart from cascading, inheritance is the phenomenon that elements inherit properties without being explicitly defined in the CSS. For example if you set the `font-size` of a `div` on `14px`, all the `p` inside this `div` will inherit that `font-size` of `14px`.

Which properties are inherited is down to common sense. For some properties it is illogic to inherit properties such as backgrounds, borders, paddings, ... On the other hand it makes sense that if you define a `font-family` on the `<html>` tag, you want it applied to everything inside that element.

A complete list of which properties are inherited can be found [in the W3 specification](http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS21/propidx.html).

**Example**

```css
div {
    font-size: 14px;
}
```

```markup
<div>
    I have a font-size of 14px.
    <p>
        But so have I!
    </p>
</div>
```

